the origin and early years of BCCI
BCCI's conception growth collapse and
criminality are inextricably linked with
personality of its founder
Agha Hassan OBT who in turn was a
product of the unique conditions of
Muslim India in the final period of
British rule prior to partition and the
first years after partition these were
years of fundamental change in the
region involving the creation of an
entire new ruling class in both Hindu
and Muslim India to replace the
departing British Foreign Service while
the period created special opportunities
for a newly emerging professional class
in both countries a BT and many of the
others who later became prominent and
Pakistani banking made up a special
class in India they had grown up as
members of a minority of an erratically
lower status than similarly educated
Hindus despite their university
education following partition these
Indian Muslims migrated northward to the
new Muslim state of Pakistan but
remained forever regarded as outsiders
by the natives accordingly as they
settled in the newly developing cities
such as Karachi and Lahore they formed a
clannish class of Muslim professionals
who kept themselves apart from other
Pakistanis IBT himself was especially
suited to succeed in the post-colonial
environment given his family's
experience in northern India and Mahmud
Abad where his father had served the
Rajah at the Rogers Court a beedi was
exposed to great wealth and to the
concept that access to it could be had
for anyone who managed to make himself
indispensable to the person who
controlled such wealth a Bedi also
learned that the previously immutable
laws of the British colonial power could
be changed at whim by the new Indian and
Pakistani rulers that followed and that
as often as not
legal obstacles to any goal could be
eliminated if they interfered with the
plans of a sufficiently important
political figure these were lessons
which a beedi applied throughout his
career as a banker and at the core of
BCCI's unique history a history of BCC I
prepared in 1982 by Khusro Karim at Elie
a key figure and bcc i--'s secret
management of first American provides a
rosy public relations view of a biddies
career to the founding of BCC I a decade
earlier the story begins in the early
40s when the Habib family of India set
up a bank in Bombay India they started
hiring young graduates as trainee
officers and among the first was a young
and warm-hearted individual named Agha
husana Bedi in 1947 when Pakistan was
formed the Habib's as Muslims moved
their bank to Pakistan the Habib's ran
the bank like a family business all
decisions were centralized with family
members and working hours were long and
hard
I got husana Biddy rose very rapidly but
soon found the atmosphere to be too
restrictive for the great number of
ideas welling up inside him in 1958 he
left Habib Bank and was able to get
together investors to form a new bank to
be known as United Bank the central bank
in Pakistan gave the license and was
quite happy with mr. Abhi's statements
that he wanted to make this the largest
bank in Pakistan they however did find
it disturbing when he described to them
in great detail how high the salaries of
the employees of this Bank would be what
would be the quality of the offices and
the extent of the mechanization that he
would go into within 10 years United
Bank became the second largest bank in
Pakistan and all that mr. obd envisioned
relating to the facilities the staff and
relating to the high quality of
appearance of the offices
to the modern outlook of the bank had
been achieved additionally the bank had
opened branches overseas in quite a few
countries including the Middle East the
bank was already poised to become the
largest bank in Pakistan but political
conditions were making it apparent to
mr. obd that Pakistan could probably not
form the basis for an operation of the
size which he and his team were capable
of this internal BCCI history focuses on
key elements of BCCI's operation already
present in the Habib and United banks a
close-knit family structure for
management high salaries and benefits to
motivate employees unusually luxurious
offices for the purpose of impressing
customers aggressive expansion beginning
with the Middle East and a bt's refusal
to live within the constraints of
government press accounts of a biddies
life from the 1970s and 1980s typically
note a biddies wish for his success to
be seen as a Pakistani version of a
Horatio Alger story success in the
material world as being merely the
logical reward for piety hardwork
sobriety discipline and loyalty internal
BCCI documents make clear a biddies
ability to motivate his employees to
work exceptionally hard yet in this a
beedis approach was little different
from other successful super salesman
what distinguished a bt's method as a
banker was his focused attention on
cultivating individuals of wealth deemed
high net worths at BCCI and those who
controlled wealth such as pakistani
government officials a BT's charisma by
all accounts ranging from statements
made by Bert Lance to Jimmy Carter to
the Pakistani bankers who went to work
for him at BCCI I got an AI son a bTW
was a man of extraordinary personal
charisma that charisma was the glue
which held BCC
together its absence following a biddies
stroke in early 1989 which led to Carter
arranging an emergency heart transplant
for him at a substantial impact on
BCCI's ability to survive the drug money
laundering indictments in Tampa and the
bank's subsequent misfortunes according
to former BCCI chief financial officer
Massey who are Amin who worked alongside
a bt for nearly two decades methi was a
man whose personality dominated all
those around him who could
simultaneously turn great personal
powers to good and to evil quote I
remember looking into his eyes and
seeing God and the devil balanced
equally in them he was already an older
man when he began BCCI and he was
determined to not waste time in taking
his vision and turning it into something
very big and quote a bead he asked the
total devotion of everyone around him
should one of his employees decide to
abandon Anna Bedi project he took it
personally as if it reflected badly on a
bt himself and would focus every
attention in an effort to persuade the
employee to change his mind for example
when BCCI officer Abdullah Kia received
two offers from other banks and decided
to leave BCC I am beat he refused to
accept the situation quote I said I have
to leave they said you can do what you
want but please stay we won't let you go
I said mr. IBT
you were making things very difficult I
have two offers one from Citicorp and
one from Bo P Canada he started crying
it was absolutely heartbreaking we used
to sit in 15,000 square feet of open
space mr. Abady is at the head of the
room and he started crying
we are people from the east we are not
trained to handle things like that
I said mr. obd my fate is in your
you can do with me what you like end
quote
a bTW as Pakistani political paymaster
am biddies earliest successes were
largely the result of his having
recognized the importance in Pakistan of
providing payoffs or other
under-the-table services to Pakistani
officials especially the leadership of
any current governing party for example
when the United Bank was formed in 1959
a Bedi appointed as chairman of its
board hi
Chandra Garr the former Prime Minister
of Pakistan it was a close confidant of
Pakistanis then current prime minister
Ayub Khan a Bedi maintained close ties
to Khan's government later hiring
general Khan's Minister of Information
to become the publisher of a BCCI
promotional magazine south when the
Pakistani military government was
replaced following the debacle that
resulted in the severance of East
Pakistan into Bangladesh Beatty became
just as cozy with Pakistani socialist
Ali Bhutto Khan's ideological opposite
when Bhutto was overthrown in 1978 and a
military coup OBD
swiftly changed allegiances again to
Bhutto's successor Islamic Puritan
General Zia Zia later executed Bhutto
for financial crimes in which a bTW
among others was clearly involved while
forming close ties to OBT on whose
financial skills he increasingly relied
Abi's personal involvement in Bhutto's
crimes was described officially in a
white paper issued by the Government of
Pakistan and July 1978 on the conduct of
the general elections in March 1977 in a
section analyzing the illegal funding of
campaign activities for the PPP the
party of Bhutto the white paper
describes how quote the other large
source of
was the money brought in by Agha Hassan
IBT amounting to two or three crores of
rupees end quote
a later reference to a BD and the white
paper describes his quote travels loaded
as he used to be with bagful of money
end quote a bt also sought out key
pillars of the Pakistani private sector
securing the sagal family is a key
client of a beetee's in three successive
banks Habib United and then BCCI the
sagal group was one of the major
industrial and trade groups in Pakistan
by the mid 1950s with its initial
fortune made in textiles and as close to
old wealth as existed at the time with
in Pakistan's commercial class a BT
first secured the sagal account while at
Habib and took the account with him when
he left to form United Bank making these
say goals United's principal
shareholders at the time some in
Pakistanis commercial community wondered
how a BD had managed to take the
important sagal relationship from the
Habib Bank 30 years later Price
Waterhouse was to detail the reason a
biddies willingness to reschedule
millions and loans to the singles
whenever they found it inconvenient to
repay them through these and similar
relationships a BT built the United Bank
into the second largest bank in Pakistan
complete with a protocol department
responsible for taking care of the
personal needs of VIPs as founder
president and chairman of United OBD was
already a great success in Pakistani
terms but a BT himself felt this was
insufficient to meet his ambitions and
so a BT increasingly began to focus on
high net worth individuals outside
Pakistan to liberate him from the
inherent limitations of being nothing
more than a very big fish
Pakistan which a beedi viewed as too
small to accommodate his vision impact
of nationalization by the early 1970s
there was an ongoing tension between a
biddies ambition to move beyond Pakistan
and that of the Pakistani government to
keep Pakistani institutions generally
and a biddies Bank specifically under
its control from the time he took power
Pakistani Prime Minister Ali Bhutto
typifying the socialist caste of much of
the former colonial world in this period
was threatening to nationalize the banks
as he already had nationalized other
sectors accordingly a beedi began moving
forward with the initial steps to form
BCCI as a Pakistani managed bank outside
of Pakistan when Bhutto and turn learned
about a beedis attempt to circumvent his
new socialist order he not only went
ahead with plans for nationalizing the
United Bank
but promptly placed OBD under house
arrest while under house arrest a bead
he further developed his scheme for his
new institution unlike United Bank it
would operate in a manner to defy the
ability of the Pakistani government or
any other to impede any objective it
might seek it would be the first global
international and indeed transnational
bank and something more a charity a
foundation a shipping Empire an insurer
a brokerage firm a commodities exchange
a publishing house a world-class
hospital for the rich a real-estate
Empire an employee cooperative an
Islamic investment bank and a third
world powerhouse as a politicized
post-colonial Pakistani a BT frequently
articulated the goal of achieving
equality of status with the financial
institutions of the former colonial
powers during the colonial period
millions of Indian and Pakistani
expatriates
had fanned out across British
possessions to become the commercial
class and many of them but they had not
yet developed their own financial
institutions and had still to rely on
European financial institutions to do
business institutions whose attitude
towards them ranged from ignorance to
neglect to contempt a bank of their own
would treat them better be able to do
far more to help them and make itself
great at the same time as a bt explained
while under house arrest - Massa who
Raman later became his chief financial
officer at BCC I quote up to that stage
in the early 1970s there were mostly
national banks and savings banks the few
banks which are international are indeed
the colonial banks from Britain France
Germany and lately from America so they
were normally not international they
were really national banks big national
banks of countries which were
international in network only so he felt
that if a genuinely global bank would be
started bridging all the third world
countries and also bridging the first
world there would be a unique banking
structure which could be very very
useful socially and also very profitable
end quote
the nationalization of Pakistani banking
which provided the impetus for BCCI
also ensured that BCCI would retain the
Segal relationship as a substantial
portion of their businesses were also
nationalized by Bhutto in 1972
nationalization also provided other
Pakistani businessmen with powerful
motivation to find a bank that could not
be controlled by the Pakistani
government the most important of these
proved to be the go call brothers
Pakistanis who became in the 1970s
through BCCI lending owners of the
largest shipping Empire in the world
with a business that ultimately included
commodity trading general trading Mannie
factoring financial services and real
estate in addition to freeing them from
the threat of pakistani appropriation
BCCI provided both the singles and the
NGO Cal's one key service from BCCI
that no other bank could provide the
freedom to defer repayment of past loans
and to borrow new money and will
moreover both clients received a special
privilege similar to that afforded
BCCI's own officers when something went
wrong and they lost money BCCI would
help them cover it up this was a matter
not just of loyalty to one's intimate
business associates it was also a matter
of sound business practice as
recognizing losses on the loans would
have hurt BCCI's balance sheets critical
elements of BCCI's creation OBD needed
five things to create BCCI first a bank
secrecy and confidentiality Haven which
he found first in Luxembourg and then in
grand Caymans second a source of capital
2.5 million dollars which a BT
ultimately obtained from Bank of America
supplemented by another $500,000 from
Sheikh Zayed of Abu Dhabi third a source
of initial assets 100 million dollars of
which at least half were provided as
deposits by Sheikh Zayed forth a group
of like-minded Pakistanis to operate the
Bank
these were now widely available as a
result of Bhutto's nationalization of
their banks
lastly credibility in the international
community through a relationship with an
established Western financial
institution which would provide prestige
to BCCI
but not interfere with its unique
approach to banking this too was
provided by Bank of America during
BCCI's formative years the most critical
of these five elements was the
relationship between BCC
and Abu Dhabi OBD
and Sheikh Zayed of Abu Dhabi
Abu Dhabi is the largest and wealthiest
member of the United Arab Emirates an
oil-rich Federation of Sheikh temps with
a combined population of under 1.5
million bordering on Saudi Arabia and
Oman with one of the world's highest
standards of living as a result of oil
wealth like all of the Gulf Sheikh tombs
Abu Dhabi is unusual among modern States
and that its ruler and the ruling family
owns all the land and natural resources
of the country and fee simple absolute
with no distinctions being made among
the wealth of the ruler his family and
the nation itself as lawyers for Abu
Dhabi have described it by tradition and
historical background of the Trucial
States the ruler of an emirate owns all
of the land of his state however he
alots
land to his subjects individually for
their use similarly all the natural
resources of the states are also
regarded as the personal property of the
ruler and his heirs who enjoy complete
authority to utilize them as they
consider fit as early as 1967 ABI T's
high net worth customers included the
ruler of Abu Dhabi Sheikh Zayed bin
Sultan Al Nahyan and his family the
illiterate Sheikh a formerly
impoverished desert Bedouin was the
recently installed head of a newly
wealthy oil State who owed his power to
a British coup against his brother in
1966 the brother had been deposed for
having been unwilling to spend Abu Dhabi
oil revenues for any purpose including
easing conditions for members of the
British Foreign Service posted there
after installing Sheikh Zayed British
officialdom had failed to pay attention
to his desire to be taken seriously as
an important world political leader by
contrast OBD viewed Sheikh
giant to be a potentially important
resource by one account the relationship
began when a beedi made the decision to
fly to Abu Dhabi in 1966 to solicit the
right of the United Bank to take
deposits from the thousands of Pakistani
workers assisting in its modernization
traveling with one assistant and
bringing an oriental rug as a gesture of
goodwill Beatty secured sheikh zayed
permission for the united bank to open a
branch in abu dhabi by a second account
a beedi beat out the habib bank for
taking care of arrangements for sheikh
zayed x'
first bustard hunting and falconry
vacation in pakistan personally waiting
patiently outside the Pakistani
government guest house while the Sheikh
napped and securing the right to handle
the sheiks logistics when he awoke by
1967 what had begun with a beedi
handling the sheiks falconry and bustard
hunting trips in Pakistan and the
finances of Pakistani workers in Abu
Dhabi wound up with a beedi running the
sheiks financial life as far as
Pakistani bankers observing the
relationship were concerned Beatty
coordinated everything for Sheikh Zayed
from the building of the sheiks palaces
in Pakistan the furnishing of his villas
in Morocco and Spain his medical
appointments to the digging of wells for
his homes in the desert as BCCI officer
Abdul or Sakia put it quote digging a
well or two was a minor cost of doing
business
ambi tees philosophy was to appeal to
every sector if you were religious
people he would help you pray end quote
from the point of view of BCCI Sheikh
Zayed and his family were ill-equipped
to handle the demands of the modern
world and in the early days dependent on
a B D and a b DS bank for their every
need even in the late 1970s sheikh zayed
whose personal tastes were quite simple
would on trips abroad routinely write
checks for 100,000 or 200,000 dollars at
a time
four members of his retinue to spend as
they liked written on the back of a
matchbook or a piece of toilet paper
this practice continued until BCCI
officers provided the Sheikh with a gold
checkbook and insisted the drafts be
written on it as Akbar bill Graeme
described his experiences with Zayed
quote he would pray or listen to the
news he had a court jester type person
who made him laugh and told him poetry
he was a simple man simple but shrewd on
a trip to Spain which lasted two weeks
his retinue spent twenty million dollars
but he only spent $400 on himself the
entire trip for two dogs whose price he
negotiated down from $1,000 he was a
simple man who did not spend a lot of
money on himself it is part of Arab
culture the Sheikh is a sort of father
figure it is hard for him to say no to
people especially because he knows that
everybody knows that he has the money he
would carry about a briefcase filled
with expensive watches
Cartier's Rolexes end quote
among BCCI officers it was believed that
the United Arab Emirates itself owed its
creation to OBT
who came up with the idea as a means of
reducing instability among the Gulf
Emirates and increasing the stature of
Sheikh Zayed as Sakia recalled quote a
BT created the UAE he planted the idea
of the UAE as a federation - Sheikh
Zayed those people had no standing
anywhere in the world they were
smugglers and tribesmen when Sheikh
Zayed would come for months in Pakistan
not even a policeman would give him any
attention yet two months after meeting a
beedi sheikh zayed finally gets a state
visit to Islamabad and meets the
President of Pakistan which then became
the first country to give him any status
the first embassy of UAE was opened in
Pakistan and the second in London
and both were staffed by a biddies
appointments end quote
in time sheikh zayed would unburden
himself to IBD and tell a BD that he
felt ignored by Westerners a sentiment
he later repeated to Bert Lance as Lance
recalled to Senate investigators and in
testimony on October 24th 1991 quote I
remember a long conversation I had with
Sheikh Zayed at his palace outside of
Islamabad there were three of us there
Bert Lance Beatty and Sheikh Zayed the
Sheikh was unhappy that the US hadn't
paid any attention to him the US
ambassador hadn't focused on him he was
being treated in a manner that really
wasn't befitting the strategic
importance or the fiscal importance of
the UAE Zayed was concerned about the
discrimination as it related to the UAE
visa the other Arab countries receiving
more attention and more concern than the
UAE was end quote it is absolutely clear
from BCCI documents that ABI T's
relationship with the Sheikh of Abu
Dhabi and the Al Nahyan family was the
foundation of the establishment of the
bank without which BCC I never could
have come into existence throughout the
first critical decade of BCCI's 18-year
existence as much as 50% of BCC is
overall assets more from Abu Dhabi and
the ANA high-end family who were earning
about 750 million dollars a year in oil
revenues in the early 1970s an amount
that rose to nearly ten billion dollars
a year by the end of the decade until
the formation of a separate affiliate
the bank of credit and commerce Emirates
BCC e BCCI function as the official bank
for the Gulf Emirates and handled a
substantial portion of Abu Dhabi's oil
revenues and yet from the beginning
there was an oddity about this central
relationship
at no time while OBD was in charge of
BCCI did Abu Dhabi hold
than a small share of BCCI's recorded
shares abu dhabi appears not to have
capitalized BCCI but instead to have
insisted on guaranteed rates of return
for the use of its money as akbar billed
Rami who handled sheikh zayed personal
finances in the late 1970s at BCCI has
described it BCCI provided Zayed with
great benefits for what appeared at the
time to be very little risk as I had
deposited substantial funds amounting to
billions of dollars in BCCI receiving a
guaranteed rate of return on these
deposits sometimes as high as 1 point 5
percent over LIBOR a standard European
funds rate in return for a relationship
that was costing him little and indeed
making him profits sheikh zayed received
the prestige and benefits of having
people all over the world believe it was
his Bank without his own funds being at
risk thus rather than being a major
investor in fact in BCCI in the early
years Abu Dhabi only agreed to place
extremely large sums of money as
deposits at the bank which BCCI used in
lieu of capital and I witnessed two
BCCI's creation described a biddies
elation after sheikh zayed agreed to
back his new bank in a scene that took
place in late 1972 in the late evening
in the living room of a pakistani banker
in abu dhabi a beedi addressed the
Pakistanis present in the following
terms quote it is truly the grace of God
that the prayers of all the UBL United
Bank of Pakistan employees who had to
flee Bangladesh and who had been kept on
the ubl payroll by us have been provided
a source of livelihood by God the sheiks
have been kind enough to give me their
trust and support the new bank that we
are creating for these employees end
quote a bt used
expression risk or Providence to
describe the deal he had consummated
with Sheikh Zayed but there would have
been a number of compelling reasons for
Sheikh Zayed to respond to a biddies
offer sheikh zayed was financially
unsophisticated and in need of
assistance from someone he could trust
to handle his finances in a manner that
would meet his personal cultural and
political needs these included the need
for secrecy as to the location and size
of his wealth given the political
instability within the region the need
to adhere to Islamic law through
structuring transactions so that they
could be profitable and safe without the
payment of interest and violation of
that law there was moreover no one
within Abu Dhabi who the Sheikh could
trust to provide the adequate secrecy
indeed apart from a BD Sheikh Zayed may
well have known no one inside or outside
Abu Dhabi with the apparent
sophistication to handle finances of the
magnitude that were being generated by
the petrol dollars in any case a beedi
had already been attending to all of the
sheiks personal needs in Pakistan for
five years thereby demonstrating his
ability to make the relationship
worry-free for the Sheikh a bowl helmi
an Iranian BCCI officer described the
relationship as a logical outgrowth of
the post-colonial period in the third
world the British ruled India Pakistan
and the Arab countries traditionally the
Indians and then the Pakistanis because
of the [ __ ] thread that linked them
became the civil servants for the
British working in the Gulf it was a
continuation of the policies of the
Empire as a result of the OBD Zayed
agreement a meeting now had essentially
unlimited resources to create BCCI
it could now act simultaneously as
manager of billions of sheikh zayed
personal wealth as banker to the United
Arab Emirates of which Sheikh Zayed was
chief of state and as
chairman of a new bank that had
guaranteed assets of hundreds of
millions of dollars from its inception
moreover sheikh zayed was accustomed to
the use of nominees as nominee purchases
were frequently employed whenever he
wished to buy anything to avoid the
price increasing if the sheiks name had
been mentioned as part of the
negotiations one consequence of this
arrangement however was that a biddies
success was overly dependent on his
relationship with Abu Dhabi and its
assets he was managing the sheiks
resources he had use of them and if he
did not meet the sheiks needs he could
lose everything
recognising this dependence a beedi made
it a practice to ensure that BCCI would
provide whatever the Shaykh required
whenever the Sheikh or his family wanted
it as BCCI records demonstrate payments
often characterized as loans were made
to members of the Abu Dhabi royal family
on an as-needed basis by BCCI without
any regard as to whether these same
resources were also being committed
elsewhere with a beedi relying on the
sheiks resources to finance his rapid
expansion BCCI's finances quickly became
so intermingled with the finances of Abu
Dhabi that it was difficult even for
BCCI insiders to determine where one
left off and the other began BCCI's
protocol department by all accounts a BT
flattered Zion and to ensure that no
detail of his needs would be neglected
established a large protocol Department
first at the United Bank and later at
BCCI the most detailed account of the
protocol department's activities
provided publicly to date has been that
of Nazir Chinoy who has a branch manager
of BCCI in Pakistan had substantial
direct contact with the head of BCCI's
protocol department Sani Ahmad and had
first-hand knowledge of the protocol
department's finances
according to Chinoy upon his arrival at
BCCI Pakistan in 1978 the protocol
department employed about 120 people
whose job was quote to establish and
further the rapport with the sheiks of
and ruling families of Dubai and Abu
Dhabi end quote the protocol Department
was financed by BCCI and had nothing to
do directly with the bank instead it was
handled as an adjunct to special
activities of a beedi managed by Ahmad
under a biddies direction and housed in
Karachi in a separate building opposite
mr. abhi tees house from 1978 through
1982 the period Chinoy was at BCCI
Pakistan the protocol Department
principally functioned as the
administrative wing of the Abu Dhabi
royal family for their foreign travel
quote the rulers and their families
would come very frequently 90% of the
time the guests were from Abu Dhabi and
Dubai occasionally Oman and the other
emirates they would come for shooting at
the game reserves there was one
particular cashier called Ibrahim sunny
would call me and tell me to make
Ibrahim available it would take five
million in huge notes of rupees at that
time about four hundred thousand dollars
in Pakistan that is a hell of a lot of
cash money it would be carried out in
steel trunks we would be given money
from the rulers account in Abu Dhabi in
u.s. dollars end quote
as of 1978 the expenses of the protocol
Department or about three hundred
thousand rupees a month about six
hundred thousand dollars a year rising
to 2.5 million dollars a year by the
early 1980s and as much as 10 million
dollars a year at the height of BCCI
success the protocol Department was not
responsible for financing its own
operations its expenses were instead
paid by the Pakistani branch of BCCI
each month after it received a statement
from BC
see I protocol chief sani Ahmed
describing his expenditures these
expenditures were always paid by the
BCCI branch
even though often the bankers were
unable to determine the nature of the
expenses or the reasons for the
expenditures according to Chinoy quote
sunny would tell me that I need 1
million rupees today and we would give
him the monies and the branch would pay
the money what it was paid for we would
have no idea I did not want to get
involved in this either and he would
report to mr. IBD and I would tell a BD
what money had been given to sunny Ahmed
Abid he would never initial or sign any
of the documents but he looked at and
approved everything
end quote each hunting trips expenses
would amount to several million dollars
requiring a special exemption from the
State Bank of Pakistan to permit the
funds to be debited from BCCI's protocol
Department this exemption was granted by
the state bank after arguments by a BD
that Pakistan needed to maintain BCCI's
relationship with Abu Dhabi as a means
of improving its overall balance of
payments by the late 1970s BCCI's
protocol Department handled all affairs
for the 18 to 20 palaces BCCI maintained
for the ruler of Abu Dhabi and Pakistan
all under the direct control of Sani
Ahmed in return money was sent each
month from BCCI Abu Dhabi to Pakistan to
pay for the gardener's telephones and
maintenance of houses the protocol
Department also established a special
relationship with Pakistani customs
Airport authorities so that members of
Arab royal families would receive VIP
treatment that avoided the usual delays
associated with entering Pakistan along
with the construction of palaces and
vacation homes BCCI handled private
matters for the visiting on the hyeon's
including the procurement of pakistani
prostitutes for the male members of the
family
these work typically teenage girls known
as singing and dancing girls and
selected outfitted and trained by a
woman named Mishima shari rahim who
later was promoted to the official
position of interior decorator to the
royal family of abu dhabi as head of the
protocol department before becoming head
of bcc i--'s washington DC
representative office Sani ahmed had a
unique role of BCCI
and special relationship with obd he was
treated with deference by other BCCI
officers who did not consider him to be
a banker but a fixer as Chinoy recalled
quote Sonny was the trusted man for
things no one else was supposed to know
we were the technocrats sani ahmed would
handle the things we wouldn't like get
girls
if anyone paid anyone any money as a
bribe Sonny would have been the one to
do it
end quote Bank of America ironically
although a bTW now had a large source of
assets for BCCI the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi
could not provide him with credibility
in the West
ABI T's first choice for a prestigious
Western partner American Express
insisted on having a major say in BCCI's
management which IBD would not tolerate
a biddies search for a more compliant
partner brought him to Bank of America
which in 1972 was one of the most
aggressive of u.s. international banks
with a presence in Iran already and in
Pakistan for BCCI
a relationship with Bank of America
would provide recognition in the West
and access to the Bank of America's
global network for correspondent banking
for the Bank of America
BCCI provided a potentially lucrative
entry to Arab oil wealth at a tiny
capitalization cost of just 2.5 million
dollars following what obd referred to
as
historic lunch in San Francisco Bank of
America agreed to provide the money and
to be a passive partner in BCCI
permitting a bt to run the operation as
he pleased as a bt told a british
magazine euro money in the summer of
1978 quote Bank of America agreed to
become a shareholder but we made it a
condition that we would establish the
management style end quote
with only three million dollars in total
capital a bt kept bcc i--'s initial
overhead down through promising the
central Pakistani recruits to his team
that they were members of a family
employed for life whose future
prosperity was being built collectively
he made the founder Group shareholders
of BCCI and put them to work in a tiny
office in Abu Dhabi sharing what masa
who are Raman later described as mess
type flats working conditions in Abu
Dhabi and at BCCI in the early days were
extremely primitive but more easily
accepted by the Pakistani bankers than
they would be by Western ones
simultaneously IBD relied upon senior
Bank of America officials to sit on
BCCI's Board of Directors to recruit
additional bankers for BCCI and to
approve all major loans by the bank
among the key figures retained by a
beedi as directors from Bank of America
or IVA LaMarche who had previously
managed Bank of America operations in
the Middle East
JD van Onan a European Bank of America
official and PC twitchin formerly vice
president of Bank of America another
prominent Bank of America figure Roy
Carlson who was based in Iran later
became president of National Bank of
Georgia at a time when it became
secretly owned by BCCI ownership
bcc i-- although abu-dhabi had a key
interest in bcc i from its creation an
accord with Abu Dhabi's failure to
provide the initial funds for
capitalization
bcc i--'s early stock recordation z' did
not show abu dhabi as the actual owner
of the bank a snapshot of bcc i shares
from Bank of America files as of
September 30th 1977 described bcc i--'s
majority owner as IC IC @ 50.1% its most
important minority owner as Bank of
America at 30% and its largest Arab
owner as Majeed Alpha Team of Dubai in
the United Arab Emirates at just 4% with
the members of the family of Abu Dhabi
owning just 3.4 percent all told this
list indicated that the Pakistanis
actually owned BCCI at a time when to
the outside world the bank was
ostensibly owned by oil-rich Middle
Eastern Arabs including the ruling
families of Bahrain sarja Dubai Saudi
Arabia and Iran as well as that of Abu
Dhabi that picture was complicated still
further however by the fact that IC IC
was not the owner of record of any of
its shares of BCCI on the share register
of BCCI and luxembourg instead several
of the shareholders on the register were
acting as nominees for BCCI according to
the bank of america records moreover
some of the subsidiaries owned by BCCI
also relied on nominees and by the late
1970s ICIC was the record controller of
as much of 70% of BCCI all told yet even
at the time BCCI officers were told by a
BD that IC IC really owned only about
30% of BCCI a further difficulty in
interpreting the issue of ownership was
that IC IC continuously was borrowing
very substantial amounts from bcc
with inadequate documentation with the
result that for all practical purposes
BCCI was repeatedly buying itself and
using various nominees along the way to
hide this fact looking to bcc i--'s
capitalization was of little help in
determining its ownership either apart
from the tiny real capital of 2.5
million dollars placed in bcc i by the
bank of america and an additional five
hundred thousand dollars acknowledged by
abu dhabi there remains no evidence of
other substantial cash infusions in the
bank in the early years suggesting that
from the beginning
ABD and sheikh zayed had agreed to
provide bcc i only the assets of sheikh
zayed as a depositor rather than his
capital as an investor this pattern in
which a BD asked for little in the way
of cash on the line from potential
investors would be repeated in other
cases except that often a shareholder
would contribute merely the prestige of
his name and aura of wealth rather than
deposits or any actual financial
contribution the early use of frontmen
as a privately held company BCCI was
obliged to no one to provide detailed
information about shareholders BCCI made
it a practice never to reveal exactly
who owned how much of the bank
however in direct contradiction to bcc
i--'s obsessive secrecy about the actual
facts of its ownership a BD heavily
publicized the fact that most of the
most important royal families of the
oil-rich states of the Middle East were
shareholders from the first in BCCI and
therefore were ostensibly backing the
bank with their fabulous petrol wealth
what the outside world did not know is
that in every case with the possible
exception of zayats and Abu Dhabi's
acknowledged holdings in BCCI
these backers had been
vided hold harmless agreements by BCCI
providing them guarantees against loss
and that the interest in BCCI held by
these royal families had been
essentially provided to them by a bt as
a gift
accompanied by generous terms on lending
and other BCCI services just as bcc
i--'s board of directors would later
contemptuously be referred to as raf for
rent efface by BCCI insiders a bt had
essentially rented the names of many of
the Arab world's most prominent oil-rich
monarchs instead of the public image of
their banking BCCI with their money BCCI
was paying them for the illusion that
they were behind the bank bcc i--'s
glossy promotional materials were
characteristically misleading on the
issue of its initial capitalization and
describing its history in a mid-1980s
group profile made available to the
public
BCCI wrote quote the BCC group was
originally conceived as an international
banking organization backed by Middle
Eastern investors to provide commercial
banking services worldwide its initial
paid up capital of 2.5 million dollars
was subscribed by Bank of America 25
percent later increased to 30 percent
and the balance by investors from the
Middle East emphasis added end quote the
deliberate vagueness of the phrase the
balance underscores the lack of any
substantial additional initial capital
in BCCI beyond that provided by Bank of
America the $500,000 investment
acknowledged by Abu Dhabi - the
subcommittee for the first time on may
14 1992 would have been considered
surprisingly tiny had it been revealed
in 1970 to some hint of how a beedi
approached the capitalisation problem is
found in a biddies motivational rhetoric
in which he constantly talked to
BCCI as something that could be created
out of pure willpower quote Western
banks concentrate on the visible
whereas we stress the invisible end
quote
oh btw told a british journalist in 1978
such a statement could be taken as many
did take it as mystical gobbledygook but
it will describe Dobie DS technique for
building a banking empire building
something out of nothing by relying on
something invisible but powerful images
of wealth these images from bcc i--'s
fancy buildings to the photographs of a
biddy posing with its fabulously wealthy
middle-eastern shareholders provided as
much power for a beedi
as the real money would have done so
long as everyone believed it was there
it was far easier to ask a
middle-eastern potentate for his name
than for his money and as far as a BD
was concerned the results were the same
although I see I see owned 70% of BCCI
in 1980 upon Bank of America's
withdrawal I see I see mysteriously
became a minority owner of BCC I by the
end of the decade as of December 31st
1989 I see I see held less than 11% of
BCCI with Abu Dhabi becoming the
principal shareholder holding over 35%
including shares owned by various
members of the Al Nahyan family and the
Abu Dhabi Investment Authority yet the
actual picture as to BCCI's ownership
even then remains clouded several of the
larger shareholders registered at that
date including LaBelle thought her own
with 11.5% Mohammed Hammoud with 3.4 4%
Abdul Rauf Khalil the Saudi government's
intelligence liaison to the United
States and other foreign governments
with 3.08 percent and kamal adham
Khalil's predecessor as saudi
intelligence chief with 2.9 4% were
acting as
see see is nominees for ownership of its
own shares through guarantees that
prevented them from being at risk
moreover Price Waterhouse could at the
time find no evidence of the bank's
actual contact with Khaleel it's
supposed shareholder for a number of
years although there were numerous
transactions in his name undertaken in
that period a year later following the
disclosure of massive losses at BCCI
as a result of Price Waterhouse reports
to the Board of Directors the Abu Dhabi
royal family had took full legal title
of BCCI increasing its share to over 78
percent of all BCCI shares with the new
shares obtained entirely from those
formerly held by the nominees given the
many mysteries about BCCI's shareholding
from its creation and the fact that
critical records remain missing it
remains difficult to determine
retrospectively whether or not Abu Dhabi
had the ability at all times to do what
it ultimately did in 1990 obtained
direct and complete formal control of
the majority of BCCI shares BCCI's
expansion throughout the 1970s BCCI
expanded rapidly with IBD adding new
corporate members to the BCCI family by
the month
initially BCCI was incorporated in one
location only luxembourg two years later
a holding company was created BCCI
holdings with the bank underneath it bcc
sa split into two parts BCCI sa with
head offices in Luxembourg and BCCI
overseas with head offices in Grand
Cayman Luxembourg was used mostly for
BCCI's European and Middle East
locations and the grand Caymans mostly
for third world countries this structure
was intentionally further complicated by
the establishment of a series of
additional entities used as parallel
banks by BCCI as needed for financial
manipulations these parallel entities
included the Kuwait International
Finance Company ki f Co in which BCCI
ostensibly had only a minority interest
a Swiss bank Banco de commerce at plus
mo sa BCP in which BCCI also ostensibly
had only a minority interest the
National Bank of Oman again with BCCI
formerly holding only a minority
interest a 100% owned finance subsidiary
credit and Finance Corporation Limited
and the series of entities based in the
grand Caymans and collectively known as
IC IC which became the principal bank
within a bank at BCCI in the cases in
which bcc i--'s official interest was
minority its apparent lack of control
was the consequence of local regulations
prohibiting a foreign bank from owning a
majority share each time BCCI found ways
to evade the regulations through the use
of frontmen or nominees and wound up
being able to direct the operations
these institutions as if they were
wholly owned subsidiaries BCCI's
aggressive drive for expansion was
necessitated by a financial strategy
that pursued asset growth rather than
profitability as the key to success this
approach was a necessity because of the
underlying lack of working capital and
BCCI's high startup costs the idea was
that through rapid growth BCCI would
eventually fill the holes in its capital
through commissions on its frenzy of
activity in the meantime growth could
disguise temporary operating losses
through creative bookkeeping in fact the
growth did not end the losses but
exacerbated the underlying capital
problem because BCCI needed to increase
its retained capital in order to show an
adequate cushion for its billions in new
assets the solution to this problem like
all others for a BD was relentless
growth to implement this approach BCCI
officers were directed to focus their
attention on individuals and entities
who controlled large sums of cash people
like central bank officials heads of
state high net worth individuals and
black marketeers and offer them terms
significantly better than the terms
offered by competing banks more services
such as kickbacks and freedom from
documentation that the competition was
unwilling to provide as a marketing
document from BCCI in the united states
prepared during the mid-1980s advises
BCCI officers they should vigilantly
look for client relationships which are
considered special for reasons such as
confidentiality high sensitivity
requirement of special attention and
service large size deposit business or
profit complexity of business etc which
would receive specialized attention from
BCCI higher-ups BCCI's
transnational character continued to be
a critical ingredient of its marketing
as BCCI historian KK Ellie noted in 1982
because BCCI quote serves no country or
individual no customer need fear that
their assets will be frozen because
their country is having a difference
with the country of BCCI's origin end
quote
fueled in part by infusions of petrol
dollar deposits from Gulf state rulers
during the heyday of the OPEC years
BCCI's early growth was exponential
especially in the United Arab Emirates
the Sultanate of Oman Yemen and Bahrain
as the following profile of the first
five years of BCCI's performance
demonstrates 1973 nineteen branches five
countries two hundred million dollars
assets 1974 twenty-seven branches
seven countries six hundred ten million
dollars assets two hundred four percent
growth 1975 sixty-four branches 13
countries 1.2 billion dollars assets 98
percent growth 1976 108 branches 21
countries 1.6 billion dollars assets 37
percent growth 1977 146 branches 43
countries 2.2 billion dollars assets 33
percent growth after consolidating its
position in the Middle East BCCI
identified Africa as the next area for
growth a number of African countries
possessed many of the traits that BCCI
had learned to exploit in the Middle
East
autocratic rulers who controlled much of
the wealth of their nations primitive
working conditions for bankers which
discouraged Westerners and non-western
attitudes towards the payment of
gratuities as a cost of doing business
an expansion began in Egypt Sudan
Mauritius and Seychelles and extended by
1979 into Kenya Swaziland Liberia
Nigeria and Sierra Leone typically BCCI
operated in these countries in a corrupt
environment marked by cash bribes
kickbacks to senior central bank
officials of the nation involved and
special arrangements with the heads of
state as a consequence of its
willingness to do things that most
Western banks were not BCCI soon became
the largest foreign bank operating in
Africa the third phase of BCCI's growth
targeted Asia and included the
acquisition of the Hong Kong
metropolitan bank from the Swiss bank
corporation this branch of BCCI later
became the vehicle for handling very
large transactions by the Chinese
government whose business OBD secured
through a mixture of public charitable
activities and private kickbacks
simultaneously BCCI decided to expand
into the Americas opening offices in
Canada branches in the United States and
in Venezuela Colombia Panama and Jamaica
by the mid-1980s BCCI's Empire extended
to banks or branches in 73 countries and
assets totalling about 22 billion
dollars BCCI's amazing rate of growth
continued in good years and bad without
regard to macroeconomic conditions for
example in Hong Kong during the
1983-1984 period BCCI prospered while
other foreign banks were forced to
retrench because of economic downturn
this phenomenon was repeated in the
United Arab Emirates during a slump that
began around 1983 because of the fall in
oil prices and in Nigeria in the late
1980s a time when other foreign banks
withdrew from operations there as BCCI
officer Nazir shenoy later explained
the case of Nigeria at least this result
was because BCCI was willing to bribe
officials and assist them in handling
their payments in a manner that the
competition hemmed in by auditors and
lawyers could not meet a biddies
mysticism as component of BCCI strategy
while engaging in corporate leisure
domain as a means for hiding what he was
doing
BT developed a peculiar mystic
philosophy for BCCI
which was shared with bcc i--'s recruits
in annual means as part of motivating
them to give their all to bcc i--'s
expansion many of bcc i--'s more senior
officials viewed OB t's philosophical
musings as boring and unintelligible
material which had to be endured at
annual meetings of bcc i-- officials a
BD would often speak about his
philosophy for hours at a time however a
biddies stature at bcc i was such that
no one ever challenged him and instead
younger officers seeking to rise in the
ranks would parrot a biddies philosophy
and describe how it had changed their
lives a biddies philosophy was an often
obscure mix of Islamic mysticism
focusing on the links between the
individual the family and the universe
and self-help cells motivational pitches
for example in describing bcc i--'s
decentralized and obscurantist structure
and philosophical terms BD wrote quote
our restructuring and reorganization has
its own meaning that emerges out of our
own needs our own purpose and our
quality and quantity of human resource
that we from time to time become we
accept the truth that each one of us is
different and like every human being
each one of us is inadequate but unlike
others we genuinely accept each other
and we have a tremendous urge and desire
to constantly move to
adequacy the quality of relationships is
the essence of an organization it is the
shining truth it is the truth that every
individual member of the family must
unveil in his feelings in his psyche
it must spark like a brilliant star in
his heart end quote
obd described the key functions of bcc
i--'s support centres to be CCI officers
under their jurisdiction as keep their
energy flow and becoming an agent of
change including extra cating the
managers and the staff from the malady
of containment and psychological
lethargy and inertia wherever it has set
in in an earlier management meeting in
New York in 1983 on memo paper featuring
a sepia toned highlight of the hand of
God touching the hand of Adam and
Michelangelo's creation from the Sistine
Chapel a BT explained that bcc i--'s
spiritual aspect was much more important
to its success than its material aspects
quote we must learn to feel that BCCI is
this power and not merely a group of
branches a set of facts and figures
since BCC is a power a spirit a desire
it is all-encompassing and unfolding it
relates itself to cosmic power and
wisdom which is the will of God our
major function to have a desire improve
its volume and quality make others have
such a desire merge this and the pool of
corporate desire make the purpose of
this desire our major purpose make it
BCC identity
end quote a BT then asked the key
pertinent question is BCC a desire or is
BCC a bank while on one level these
philosophic discussions appear far
removed from the practical elements of
banking
in fact there was an important link
between the philosophy and BCCI's
strategy of asset growth the philosophy
obscure as it was described the
importance of relentless ceaseless
activity as a means of growth and of the
need to remove obstacles to the growth
regardless of the source junior officers
were encouraged to keep things moving
and not to worry much about rules senior
managers were advised to encourage
junior officers to experiment and to
help them circumvent even the rather
relaxed procedures that apply to doing
business at BCCI as a bt told 45 of his
managers in 1985 quote if our colleagues
who represent young energy and young
hope do not live up to our standards in
the tasks they perform how do we deal
with them
our response could either encourage them
to flow and in time enable them to come
closer to the desired standards or may
stifle and discourage them early on in
their careers thereby diminishing any
chance of them improving and performance
towards excellence do not nip the flower
in the bud give them room to breathe
end quote under a biddies guidance BCCI
officers learned that they would be
rewarded for any technique that allowed
them to acquire customers and assets and
would not be punished by the bank even
for engaging in unorthodox or illegal
banking practices and the words of BCCI
official akbar bill Graeme quote a BT
had a saying to younger employees that
if a banker cannot make money for
himself it cannot make money for the
bank it was an invitation to enrich
yourself that I never felt comfortable
with end quote
when a BCCI banker was caught by local
regulations he would not be punished but
simply transferred from the location or
from BCCI
to another entity controlled by the bank
often with a bonus payment by contrast
if an officer refused to facilitate an
obviously illegal transaction BCCI's
senior officials would simply go around
him and his career would suffer
accordingly a bt made use of mysticism
as a motivational technique even on the
most mundane of banking matters when
BCCI developed traveler's checks in 1986
as a new product a bt convened a
conference of BCCI employees to announce
that these checks were quote a profit
full instrument of relationship and
quote a bt announced that quote
traveler's checks add a new dimension to
my personality they are a means of
making a profit and at the same time a
means of fulfilling my aspirations there
is great happiness and selling the
largest possible volume of traveler's
checks end quote
compartmentalization as a technique for
ensuring security and control a bt
adopted a strategy taken from
intelligence operations he
compartmentalized information about BCCI
compartmentalization ensured that even
within the bank officers in one
operation would have little to no
information about the nature of the
activities of an officer in another area
not only was information about BCCI's
activities closely held but even senior
officials were discouraged by a bt from
asking questions as Massa Hui Raman
testified quote I was very uncomfortable
because in previous bank jobs I could go
across the board and go to any division
and see any of the operation but here I
could see these Chinese walls were
getting very very watertight and we were
always taught about humility and ego and
anything that was slightly out of
context was considered just an ego trip
end quote
stead of having vice presidencies the
bank had fifty senior executives and 198
managers with only two people considered
to be higher up than all others
I'm Beatty and his chief assistant
swallowed Naqvi as Rahman described it
quote there was mr. IBD at the very top
there was mr. Naqvi who is like a chief
operating officer who converted mr.
Abhi's ideas and things into practical
shapes and then there was a big gap
between these two and the other
executives who were all called general
managers all of us were called general
managers you couldn't be senior to
anybody else
you're all the same pay the same
benefits consequence of BCCI structure
and philosophy on audits a biddies
unique approach to banking had the
effect of removing most checks and
balances on BCCI
other senior officers did not have a
complete picture of BCCI's operations
the Board of Directors learned little
beyond what obedient not be told them
and Outsiders including BCCI's auditors
could be easily manipulated this
manipulation was facilitated by a beedis
decision to divide its annual audits
between two of the then big eight
accounting firms Ernst & Whinney and
Price Waterhouse with Ernst & Whinney
taking responsibility over only the
holding company and BCCI Luxembourg and
Price Waterhouse taking responsibility
over only BCCI overseas in the Grand
Cayman a state of affairs which ended
with Ernst and Winnie's withdrawal in
1986 and Price Waterhouse gaining
responsibility for a consolidated audit
of all BCCI activities in 1987 even then
however Price Waterhouse was not in the
position to review BCCI's overall
picture due to the exclusion from its
audit work of a number of BCCI
affiliates some secretly owned including
ice
cic ki f co and b CP moreover as late as
1990 he documents involving guarantees
against loss by BCCI two principal
shareholders held in the grand Caymans
and in Abu Dhabi do not appear to have
been made available to auditors
obstacles in the United Kingdom some of
the same factors that made BCCI's growth
possible also inhibited from further
expansion its rapid expansion had
prompted intense speculation in the
United Kingdom which was interfering
with BCCI's ability to obtain a full
banking license from the Bank of England
as a bt implicitly acknowledged in a
1978 interview quote the Bank of England
probably hasn't given permission because
of the atmosphere surrounding the BCCI
and the propaganda that has been spread
about us it is not only the Bank of
England that is against us but the club
end quote the hostility to BCCI in the
United Kingdom which was the
headquarters for BCCI's operations was
all too reminiscent to a bTW of the
conditions that had led to the demise of
the United Bank in Pakistan a beedi
needed to move outside the reach of the
United Kingdom an obvious solution was
to find a new home for BCCI
in the United States unfortunately the
relationship with Bank of America had
become an obstacle to such a move for
BCCI rather than C BCCI
expand into its home base Bank of
America was increasingly uncomfortable
with its partner despite its initial
agreement to let BCCI be BCC I am
Beatty's original US partner Bank of
America that found itself bewildered by
many BCCI practices from the beginning
an internal family history of BCCI
written as a case study by one of bcc
i--'s key officers in the United States
Soroka doormat le on October 27 1982
provides a sanitized version from bcc
i--'s point of view of what went wrong
between bcc i and bank of america quote
the bank of america found on their hands
an affiliate which had already become
one of their largest and in which they
had no management control they were also
being required to contribute every year
to the increase of capital in order to
maintain their portion of the
shareholding perhaps most importantly
they had also arrived at the conclusion
that the Middle East had become far too
important not to have a direct presence
end quote
in fact by 1976 Bank of America had
already stopped contributing to new
infusions of capital for BCCI reducing
its share from 30% to 24% by the spring
of 1976 extensive discussions within
bank of america about bcc i--'s unusual
practices and resulted in a series of
memos being created and circulated among
senior officials at the bank two of
these memoranda introduced as exhibits
in the 1978 litigation over the FGB
takeover make explicit the profound
disquiet at Bank of America over bcc
i--'s handling of its Arab clients and
its management style the first memo
written May 10th 1976 from Bank of
America executive vice president Alvin C
Rice to scut and Hersman jr. a senior
vice president noted the concerns that
some in Bank of America had expressed
about bcc i--'s unusual attention to
meeting the personal needs of leading
political figures especially in the
Middle East but stated that no
bookkeeping entries demonstrating abuses
had been found
rice warned however that the overall
relationship between Bank of America and
BCCI was a difficult one quote we are
just not operating on the basis of
mutual trust and
operation that make the whole effort and
exercise worthwhile substantial profits
usually have a way of curing problems
but this case is an exception if we
can't make some major breakthroughs in
the near future we will have to consider
alternatives such as divestiture end
quote in the second memo written
following a meeting between rice and OBT
rice described how he and a BD had
discussed the problem of BCCI officials
withholding information from Bank of
America officials a BD attributed this
to cultural differences quote according
to a bt frank criticism american style
is something Pakistanis are not
accustomed to criticism is taken as a
personal affront and for this reason
sometimes BCCI officers have not wanted
to disclose fully operating procedures
that they knew would not meet Bank of
America's quality standards end quote
later rice would tell journalists that
the fundamental problem he encountered
with BCCI was that BCCI thought nothing
of bribery and believed that even
obstacles with regulators could be fixed
through baksheesh these concerns
simmered for another year at Bank of
America but by the fall of 1977
disapproving questions from an auditor
from the US Comptroller of the currency
in London responsible for reviewing Bank
of America's overseas holdings
intensified Bank of America's concerns
these concerns had already been
acknowledged privately in other Bank of
America internal memoranda about BCCI
it's overly cozy relationship with its
shareholders its practice of providing
shareholders with unusual banking
services Bank of America's inability to
penetrate BCCI's banking practices and
BCCI's hostility to Bank of America
inquiries about those practices by
February 1978 the OCC auditor had
concluded that Bank of America was
substan
at risk from BCCI but by then
divestiture of BCCI by Bank of America
was in the interests of both banks BCCI
needed to sever its relationship with
Bank of America to provide itself with
additional options in connection with
its ongoing attempt to buy financial
general Bancshares Bank of America
needed to reduce what might soon become
an actual liability on its books
accordingly Bank of America had begun to
implement a rapid divestment agreement
with BCCI through the purchase of the
Bank of America shares by BCCI's Bank
within a bank I see I see
described by the Bank of America in a
January 30th 1978 press release merely
as one of the other major BCCI
shareholders in announcing the sale of
its stake in BCCI Bank of America
emphasized that quote the close
cooperation that has developed between
the two banks will be maintained and
quote over the following decade Bank of
America would in fact maintain
correspondent banking relationships with
BCC I continually seek additional
business from BCC I collude and at least
one of bcc i--'s purchases of foreign
banks through nominees in South America
and earn a great deal of money from the
relationship until bcc i--'s closure
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you